# :monocle_face: Analyzing data

## Downloading data
You can use the command `npm run getdata` (which runs the script `scripts/download_data.mjs`) to download your data from Firebase. 
If run with no arguments, the script will ask your four questions before downloading the data:

* Whether you want to download testing data (generated by running your experiment in development mode) or real data (generated from the deployment of your experiment)?
* Whether you want to download all data, or only data from participants marked as complete (participants who reached the end of the experiment)?
* Which deployment branch do you want to download data from (defaults to the `main` branch)?
* What file name (or full path) to save the data into?

Alternatively, you can specify any number of these through command-line arguments:

`npm run getdata -- --type <real|testing> --complete_only <all|complete_only> --branch_name <name> --filename <name-or-path>`

The script will ask you regarding any arguments not specified through the command-line.

## Analyzing data
Once you have a data file, you can load and analyze it in the programming language of your choice. 
The following examples all use Python.
The data file is saved as a JSON file, and so using the `json` package is the simplest way to load it:
```python
import json

DATA_PATH = '...'

with open(DATA_PATH, 'r') as f:
  raw_data = json.load(f)
```
The loaded object is a list, where each entry in the list is a dictionary with two keys: `id` is the ID of the participant's data in the database, and `data` is a dictionary with the participant's data.
Many of the fields it includes are automatically populated by <SmileText/>, and it will include your experiment's data. 
The structure of the data should match the structure of the `data` attribute in your `smilestore` in [`smiledata.js`](https://github.com/NYUCCL/smile/blob/data-download-script-improvements/src/stores/smiledata.js).

For a slightly nicer data loading experience (which loads data into Python objects with attributes, rather than just dictionaries), you can use the following extension of `types.SimpleNamespace`:
```python
import json
from types import SimpleNamespace

DATA_PATH = '...'

with open(DATA_PATH, 'r') as f:
  data = json.load(f, object_hook=lambda d: ExtendedSimpleNamespace(**d))
```


