docs/configuration.md, before:

# :gear: Configuration Options

<style>
.note {
    font-size: 0.9em;
    text-align: right;
}
</style>

Applications inevitably need configuration options. These control the look and feel of your experiment or have the password for databases or other services.

This guide gives you the minimum information you need to get started as well as details on adding new configuration options specific for your project.

## Getting started quickly

Configuration options in <SmileText/> are stored in various [dotenv](https://dotenv.org) files in the `env/` folder of the project. [dotenv](https://dotenv.org) files are simply plain text files that define configuration options in all caps along with values separated by an equals sign.[^wisdom]. For example:

[^wisdom]: Some wisdom about these things is available on the [12 Factor App](https://12factor.net) site, particularly the section on [config](https://12factor.net/config). In this document, it is argued that environment variables are the safest way to configure sensitive information (this way they are never mentioned in files that could be accidentally committed.)

```
MY_CONFIG_OPTION  = 'hi'
ANOTHER_OPTION    = 33
MY_CONFIG         = '${MY_CONFIG_OPTION}1234'
```

If you are in the <GureckisLabText/>, the <SmileText/> repo contains encrypted versions of our lab configuration files. As described in the [starting a new project](/starting) guide, you will want to simply decrypt the files provided in the repository.

::: danger Warning!
This will only work if you have first sent Todd your gpg key and waited for him to push a change to the <SmileText/> repo. See instructions [here](/requirements#_3-request-access-to-the-shared-database-resources).
:::

To do this simply type:

```
git secret reveal
```

this should create several `.env.*.local` files in your `env/` directory (the `*` means anything fills in there).

After all the necessary files are in the `env` folder run:

```
npm run upload_config
```

to configure your deployment process.

That's it. But if you need to customize your options keep reading.

## Types of configuration variables

There are several configuration variables across different files. The first thing to be aware of is that some variables begin with `VITE_` (e.g., `VITE_BUG_REPORTS`). These variables can be exported and made available to the Javascript of your experiment.

Variables that do not begin with `VITE_` are only available for other purposes (e.g., configuring GitHub Actions, etc...).

## How configuration files are organized

Configuration files go in the `env` folder. Here is a typical listing of this folder.

```
env/
├── .env
├── .env.local
├── .env.git.local
├── .env.docs.local
└── .env.deploy.local
```

You may not see all these files to begin with and so may need to create them (as just described in a [previous section of this page](#getting-started-quickly) or manually).

All the filenames begin with `.env` which is the convention used by the [dotenv](https://dotenv.org) package. This is a growing standard within the web application community.

Some files end in `.local` as the file extension. These files are by default
ignored by git (via the `.gitignore` file) and so are not version tracked. This is necessary because some
configuration options which go in those files are considered "secret" and we don't want them easily searched
in GitHub when/if your project repository becomes publically shared.

Let's consider the files one by one.

#### Experiment Options (`.env`)

`.env` **is** version tracked in git and contains what we will call **experiment** configuration options. These options are usually critical for replicability of an experiment. Here is a typical file with fake entries for the values (adjust for your situation):

```
# this file is tracked by github and contains
# configuration parameters for the experiment which
# are critical for reproducibiliy

VITE_BROWSER_EXCLUDE             = ie
VITE_ALLOW_REPEATS               = true
VITE_RANDOM_SEED                 = 100012
VITE_AUTO_SAVE_DATA              = true
VITE_MAX_WRITES                  = 1000
VITE_MIN_WRITE_INTERVAL          = 2000
VITE_SHOW_PROGRESS_BAR           = false
VITE_VIEWPORT_REQUEST            = 800x600

VITE_ESTIMATED_TIME              = "30-40 minutes"
VITE_PAYRATE_HOURLY              = "$15USD/hour + performance related bonus"
```

Notice that the configuration options in this file begin with `VITE_`. This means they are made
available to the web application/experiment.

- `VITE_BROWSER_EXCLUDE` is a string that configures which
  types of browsers can take your experiment.
- `VITE_ALLOW_REPEATS` attempts to prevent participants
  from taking your task more than once.
- `VITE_AUTO_SAVE_DATA` configures if smile attempts to automatically save data when pages in the [TimelineStepper](timeline.html#timelinestepper) are advanced.
- `VITE_MAX_WRITES` configures the maximum total number of writes that each experiment can perform to the Firestore database. Each write to the database document costs money so this can prevent runaway costs. It can be adjusted if needed though for you specific experiment.
- `VITE_MIN_WRITE_INTERVAL` configured the minimum time in milliseconds that should pass between writes to the Firestore. This respects Firestore's limit of 1 write per document per second. It defaults to 2000ms.
- `VITE_SHOW_PROGRESS_BAR` configures if the progress bar should be visible at the bottom of the screen.
- `VITE_WINDOWSIZER_REQUEST` configures the requested size of the page for rendering content (used by WindowSizerPage.vue component)
- `VITE_RANDOM_SEED` initializes the pseudo-random number generator in <SmileText />
- `VITE_ESTIMATED_TIME` is text you can include in an ad for the study (e.g., mechanical turk) to let people know how long to expect the task to take. It might need to be references several places so putting it in the config can be helpful.
- `VITE_PAYRATE` is text about the payrate for the study. Again, it is a configuration option since it might need to be referenced in several components and templates.

#### Web Services Options (`.env.local`)

`.env.local` contains options for connection to other web services such as Firebase/Firestore for databases or for tracking bugs. These options are not particularly "secret" (the options begin with `VITE_` which means they are made available to the webapp), but aren't things we necessarily want to be crawlable on github public repositories.

```
# enter firebase database credentials
VITE_FIREBASE_APIKEY             = apikey
VITE_FIREBASE_AUTHDOMAIN         = project.firebaseapp.com
VITE_FIREBASE_PROJECTID          = project
VITE_FIREBASE_STORAGEBUCKET      = project.appspot.com
VITE_FIREBASE_MESSAGINGSENDERID  = msgid
VITE_FIREBASE_APPID              = appid

# configure your experiment here
VITE_BUG_REPORTS                 = "http://smile.gureckislab.org/bugs"
```

- There several `VITE_FIREBASE_` options for configuring Google's
  Firestore backend (see [data storage](/datastorage) for more info).
- `VITE_BUG_REPORTS` is a URL you want participants to go to
  report a problem with your experiment.

#### Code Version Options (`.env.github.local`)

The `.env.github.local` file contains information about the latest git commit for this project. The purpose of this file
is so that your Javascript application can keep track of which version of the code it is running.
One key principle of <SmileText/> is that [data must always be linked to the code that created it](principles.html#data-must-always-be-linked-to-the-code-that-created-it).

This file is generated automatically using a [post commit hook](https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/git-hooks) which finds the current information and regenerates the file. For this reason you should **never edit this file**. A helpful message at the top of the file will always remind you this. The post-commit hook logic which generates the file is stored in `scripts/post-commit`.

```
# DO NOT EDIT THIS FILE IT IS AUTOMATICALLY GENERATED
# this file is automatically generated by
# the post-commit hook (see scripts/post-commit).

VITE_PROJECT_NAME      = my_cool_project
VITE_GIT_HASH          = de318d8
VITE_GIT_REPO_NAME     = ${VITE_PROJECT_NAME}
VITE_GIT_OWNER         = gureckis
VITE_GIT_BRANCH_NAME   = main
VITE_GIT_LAST_MSG      = trigger a deployment!!
VITE_DEPLOY_BASE_PATH  =  "/${VITE_GIT_OWNER}/${VITE_GIT_REPO_NAME}/${VITE_GIT_BRANCH_NAME}/"
VITE_CODE_NAME         = something-something-something

# this port might not be correct, but it doesn't really matter
VITE_DEV_PORT_NUM      =  3000
VITE_DEPLOY_URL        =  "http://localhost:${VITE_PORT_NUM}${VITE_DEPLOY_BASE_PATH}"
VITE_CODE_NAME_DEPLOY_URL         =  "http://localhost:${VITE_DEV_PORT_NUM}/e/${VITE_CODE_NAME}"
```

Options include

- `VITE_PROJECT_NAME` is the name of your project (obtained from your the name of your git repository)
- `VITE_GIT_HASH` is a [SHA hash](https://www.designveloper.com/blog/hash-values-sha-1-in-git/) that indexes the current commit. This can be used on GitHub to look up any version of the code as you develop.
- `VITE_REPO_NAME` has the same value as `VITE_PROJECT_NAME`.
- `VITE_GIT_OWNER` is the username of the owner of the repository
- `VITE_BRANCH_NAME` is the name of the branch the most recent commit was made on
- `VITE_GIT_LAST_MSG` is the last commit message
- `VITE_DEPLOY_BASE_PATH` is the most important variable in the file because it configures your [deployment path](/deploying.html#using-github-as-a-project-organizing-tool) or where you code will appear on the server. It is built up out of the configuration options above.
- `VITE_CODE_NAME` is a unique hash of `VITE_DEPLOY_BASE_PATH`` using human readable words (via [codenamize](https://github.com/stemail23/codenamize-js))
- `VITE_DEV_PORT_NUM ` is what port Vite will try to use during development and local integration testing (i.e., when you run `npm run dev`). Defaults to `3010`.
- `VITE_DEPLOY_URL` is the expected URL for your application. When you run the deployment this is set to the final URL of your hosted server. When debugging locally (`npm run dev`) this is set to the URL you open in your browser to develop/debug.
- `VITE_CODE_NAME_DEPLOY_URL` is the version of the deploy URL masked by the `VITE_CODE_NAME`

##### Docs Deployment Config (`.env.docs.local`)

This file configures where the <SmileText/> documentation will be deployed to. These options should generally be shielded from public repositories. Note that these variable names do not begin with `VITE_` meaning they are not accessible to your Javascript experiment.

```
# this file is not tracked by github and contains
# sensitive information inluding write access to our documentation
# web server!

# enter docs web server information here
DOCS_DEPLOY_HOST        = "docs.mydomain.org"
DOCS_DEPLOY_PATH        = "/home/user/domain.org"
DOCS_DEPLOY_PORT        = 22
DOCS_DEPLOY_USER        = user
DOCS_DEPLOY_KEY         = "-----BEGIN RSA PRIVATE KEY-----\nYOURKEY\n-----END RSA PRIVATE KEY-----"
```

- `DOCS_DEPLOY_HOST` is the hostname of where you upload your files
- `DOCS_DEPLOY_PATH` is the directory you upload your docs to
- `DOCS_DEPLOY_PORT` is the ssh port for your server (usually 22)
- `DOCS_DEPLOY_USER` is the username for your server
- `DOCS_DEPLOY_KEY` is the RSA private key used to access your server via passwordless ssh[^rsakey]

##### Deployment Config (`.env.deploy.local`)

The final file configures similar (secret) deployment options for your actual experiment.

```
# this file is not tracked by github and contains
# sensitive information inluding write access to our experiment
# hosting web server!

# enter experiment hosting web server information here
EXP_DEPLOY_HOST        = "exps.mydomain.org"
EXP_DEPLOY_PATH        = "/home/user/exps.mydomain.org"
EXP_DEPLOY_PORT        = 22
EXP_DEPLOY_USER        = user
SLACK_WEBHOOK_URL      = https://hooks.slack.com/workflows/something
SLACK_WEBHOOK_ERROR_URL= https://hooks.slack.com/workflows/somethingelse
EXP_DEPLOY_KEY         = "-----BEGIN RSA PRIVATE KEY-----\n-----END RSA PRIVATE KEY-----"

```

- `EXP_DEPLOY_HOST` is the hostname of where you upload your files
- `EXP_DEPLOY_PATH` is the directory you upload your experiment to
- `EXP_DEPLOY_PORT` is the ssh port for your server (usually 22)
- `EXP_DEPLOY_USER` is the username for your server
- `SLACK_WEBHOOK_URL` is the url for the Slack Webhook for posting deployment messages
- `SLACK_WEBHOOK_ERROR_URL` is the url for the Slack Webhook for posting error messages
- `EXP_DEPLOY_KEY` is the RSA private key used to access your server via passwordless ssh[^rsakey]

[^rsakey]: The key needs to be all on one line with `\n` character coding new lines.

## Configuring your deployment settings on GitHub

Several of the configuration options are designed to configure ["secrets"](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/security-guides/encrypted-secrets) on your GitHub repo. These are variables that you define in the settings section of the repository which can then be accessed by a script at run time using Github Actions. They are omitted from version control and from logs making it a good way to share sensitive information without exposing them in a public repo. When you run `npm run upload_config` you should see output like this (with NYUCCL/smile replaced with your username and repo):

```
> smile@0.0.0 upload_config
> sh scripts/update_config.sh

✓ Set Actions secret SECRET_APP_CONFIG for NYUCCL/smile
✓ Set Actions secret DOCS_DEPLOY_PORT for NYUCCL/smile
✓ Set Actions secret DOCS_DEPLOY_PATH for NYUCCL/smile
✓ Set Actions secret DOCS_DEPLOY_USER for NYUCCL/smile
✓ Set Actions secret DOCS_DEPLOY_HOST for NYUCCL/smile
✓ Set Actions secret DOCS_DEPLOY_KEY for NYUCCL/smile
✓ Set Actions secret EXP_DEPLOY_HOST for NYUCCL/smile
✓ Set Actions secret SLACK_WEBHOOK_ERROR_URL for NYUCCL/smile
✓ Set Actions secret EXP_DEPLOY_KEY for NYUCCL/smile
✓ Set Actions secret EXP_DEPLOY_USER for NYUCCL/smile
✓ Set Actions secret EXP_DEPLOY_PATH for NYUCCL/smile
✓ Set Actions secret EXP_DEPLOY_PORT for NYUCCL/smile
✓ Set Actions secret SLACK_WEBHOOK_URL for NYUCCL/smile
```

These secrets are used by the GitHub actions to properly build and deploy your website and docs without causing problems. See the discussion [here](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/60176044/how-do-i-use-an-env-file-with-github-actions) for some helpful tips.

## Importing configuration settings into your experiment

Variables with the name `VITE_` are made available to your web application/experiment. [Vite](https://vitejs.dev) uses the [dotenv Node.js package](https://vitejs.dev/guide/env-and-mode.html) to read in `.env` files and make them accessible in your javascript. This is done by doing a static string replacement operation on all the files before building them (and is also done as a step in the development server). The variables become available in your code as `import.meta.env.VITE_XXXX` where `XXX` is the name of the environment variable.

If you look at the content of `src/config.js` you can see how these items are pulled into a global configuration object.

```
// config.js

// global configuration options for the smile app

export default {
    project_name: import.meta.env.VITE_PROJECT_NAME, // autocompute this on intitialization
    code_name: import.meta.env.VITE_CODE_NAME,
    code_name_url: import.meta.env.VITE_CODE_NAME_DEPLOY_URL,
    github: {
        repo_name: import.meta.env.VITE_GIT_REPO_NAME,
        owner: import.meta.env.VITE_GIT_OWNER,
        branch: import.meta.env.VITE_GIT_BRANCH_NAME,
        last_commit_msg: import.meta.env.VITE_GIT_LAST_MSG,
        last_commit_hash: import.meta.env.VITE_GIT_HASH, // autocompute this all the time
        commit_url: 'https://github.com/' + import.meta.env.VITE_GIT_OWNER + '/' + import.meta.env.VITE_GIT_REPO_NAME + '/commit/' + import.meta.env.VITE_GIT_HASH
    },
    browser_exclude: import.meta.env.VITE_BROWSER_EXCLUDE,
    allow_repeats: import.meta.env.VITE_ALLOW_REPEATS,
    bug_reports: import.meta.env.VITE_BUG_REPORTS,
    deploy_url: import.meta.env.VITE_DEPLOY_URL, // auto compute this
    firebaseConfig : {
        apiKey: import.meta.env.VITE_FIREBASE_APIKEY,
        authDomain: import.meta.env.VITE_FIREBASE_AUTHDOMAIN,
        projectId: import.meta.env.VITE_FIREBASE_PROJECTID,
        storageBucket: import.meta.env.VITE_FIREBASE_STORAGEBUCKET,
        messagingSenderId: import.meta.env.VITE_FIREBASE_MESSAGINGSENDERID,
        appId: import.meta.env.VITE_FIREBASE_APPID
    }
}
```

It is important to keep in mind that variables passed to `src/core/config.js` will not necessarily appear in GitHub but **will** be visible to people performing your experiment via the source code. So it is useful to keep in mind if a configuration option should or shouldn't be shared with your Javascript experiment.

## Adding New Configuration Options

Adding new configuration options should mostly happen in `.env.local`. You simply make up a new `VITE_SOMETHING` variable. Then add it to the object in `src/core/config.js` to expose it to your web application! The configuration is available as `smileconfig` anywhere in your Vue app. It's pretty easy.

Note: if you add new configuration options, you need to also update them on GitHub for those to sync to deployments. Run `npm run upload_config` as explained above under [Configuring your deployment settings on GitHub](#configuring-your-deployment-settings-on-github).

Commit message:

initial support for windowsizing agression
- when user resizes window too small this allows an “agressive” mode where the experiment pauses until they make the browser window the correct size again.
- tries to ensure visibility of all the elements on the page

docs/configuration.md, after:

# :gear: Configuration Options

<style>
.note {
    font-size: 0.9em;
    text-align: right;
}
</style>

Applications inevitably need configuration options. These control the look and feel of your experiment or have the password for databases or other services.

This guide gives you the minimum information you need to get started as well as details on adding new configuration options specific for your project.

## Getting started quickly

Configuration options in <SmileText/> are stored in various [dotenv](https://dotenv.org) files in the `env/` folder of the project. [dotenv](https://dotenv.org) files are simply plain text files that define configuration options in all caps along with values separated by an equals sign.[^wisdom]. For example:

[^wisdom]: Some wisdom about these things is available on the [12 Factor App](https://12factor.net) site, particularly the section on [config](https://12factor.net/config). In this document, it is argued that environment variables are the safest way to configure sensitive information (this way they are never mentioned in files that could be accidentally committed.)

```
MY_CONFIG_OPTION  = 'hi'
ANOTHER_OPTION    = 33
MY_CONFIG         = '${MY_CONFIG_OPTION}1234'
```

If you are in the <GureckisLabText/>, the <SmileText/> repo contains encrypted versions of our lab configuration files. As described in the [starting a new project](/starting) guide, you will want to simply decrypt the files provided in the repository.

::: danger Warning!
This will only work if you have first sent Todd your gpg key and waited for him to push a change to the <SmileText/> repo. See instructions [here](/requirements#_3-request-access-to-the-shared-database-resources).
:::

To do this simply type:

```
git secret reveal
```

this should create several `.env.*.local` files in your `env/` directory (the `*` means anything fills in there).

After all the necessary files are in the `env` folder run:

```
npm run upload_config
```

to configure your deployment process.

That's it. But if you need to customize your options keep reading.

## Types of configuration variables

There are several configuration variables across different files. The first thing to be aware of is that some variables begin with `VITE_` (e.g., `VITE_BUG_REPORTS`). These variables can be exported and made available to the Javascript of your experiment.

Variables that do not begin with `VITE_` are only available for other purposes (e.g., configuring GitHub Actions, etc...).

## How configuration files are organized

Configuration files go in the `env` folder. Here is a typical listing of this folder.

```
env/
├── .env
├── .env.local
├── .env.git.local
├── .env.docs.local
└── .env.deploy.local
```

You may not see all these files to begin with and so may need to create them (as just described in a [previous section of this page](#getting-started-quickly) or manually).

All the filenames begin with `.env` which is the convention used by the [dotenv](https://dotenv.org) package. This is a growing standard within the web application community.

Some files end in `.local` as the file extension. These files are by default
ignored by git (via the `.gitignore` file) and so are not version tracked. This is necessary because some
configuration options which go in those files are considered "secret" and we don't want them easily searched
in GitHub when/if your project repository becomes publically shared.

Let's consider the files one by one.

#### Experiment Options (`.env`)

`.env` **is** version tracked in git and contains what we will call **experiment** configuration options. These options are usually critical for replicability of an experiment. Here is a typical file with fake entries for the values (adjust for your situation):

```
# this file is tracked by github and contains
# configuration parameters for the experiment which
# are critical for reproducibiliy

VITE_BROWSER_EXCLUDE             = ie
VITE_ALLOW_REPEATS               = true
VITE_RANDOM_SEED                 = 100012
VITE_AUTO_SAVE_DATA              = true
VITE_MAX_WRITES                  = 1000
VITE_MIN_WRITE_INTERVAL          = 2000
VITE_SHOW_PROGRESS_BAR           = false

VITE_VIEWPORT_REQUEST            = 800x600
VITE_WINDOWSIZER_AGRESSIVE       = true

VITE_ESTIMATED_TIME              = "30-40 minutes"
VITE_PAYRATE_HOURLY              = "$15USD/hour + performance related bonus"
```

Notice that the configuration options in this file begin with `VITE_`. This means they are made
available to the web application/experiment.

- `VITE_BROWSER_EXCLUDE` is a string that configures which
  types of browsers can take your experiment.
- `VITE_ALLOW_REPEATS` attempts to prevent participants
  from taking your task more than once.
- `VITE_AUTO_SAVE_DATA` configures if smile attempts to automatically save data when pages in the [TimelineStepper](timeline.html#timelinestepper) are advanced.
- `VITE_MAX_WRITES` configures the maximum total number of writes that each experiment can perform to the Firestore database. Each write to the database document costs money so this can prevent runaway costs. It can be adjusted if needed though for you specific experiment.
- `VITE_MIN_WRITE_INTERVAL` configured the minimum time in milliseconds that should pass between writes to the Firestore. This respects Firestore's limit of 1 write per document per second. It defaults to 2000ms.
- `VITE_SHOW_PROGRESS_BAR` configures if the progress bar should be visible at the bottom of the screen.
- `VITE_WINDOWSIZER_REQUEST` configures the requested size of the page for rendering content (used by WindowSizerPage.vue component)
- `VITE_WINDOWSIZER_AGGRESSIVE` if set to true and the user resizes the page, this will hide the task and show a guide to resize the window. It is called "aggressive" since it really stops the task moving forward when the user makes their window too small.  This is enabled only after the subject is told and agrees they made the window a given size.
- `VITE_RANDOM_SEED` initializes the pseudo-random number generator in <SmileText />
- `VITE_ESTIMATED_TIME` is text you can include in an ad for the study (e.g., mechanical turk) to let people know how long to expect the task to take. It might need to be references several places so putting it in the config can be helpful.
- `VITE_PAYRATE` is text about the payrate for the study. Again, it is a configuration option since it might need to be referenced in several components and templates.

#### Web Services Options (`.env.local`)

`.env.local` contains options for connection to other web services such as Firebase/Firestore for databases or for tracking bugs. These options are not particularly "secret" (the options begin with `VITE_` which means they are made available to the webapp), but aren't things we necessarily want to be crawlable on github public repositories.

```
# enter firebase database credentials
VITE_FIREBASE_APIKEY             = apikey
VITE_FIREBASE_AUTHDOMAIN         = project.firebaseapp.com
VITE_FIREBASE_PROJECTID          = project
VITE_FIREBASE_STORAGEBUCKET      = project.appspot.com
VITE_FIREBASE_MESSAGINGSENDERID  = msgid
VITE_FIREBASE_APPID              = appid

# configure your experiment here
VITE_BUG_REPORTS                 = "http://smile.gureckislab.org/bugs"
```

- There several `VITE_FIREBASE_` options for configuring Google's
  Firestore backend (see [data storage](/datastorage) for more info).
- `VITE_BUG_REPORTS` is a URL you want participants to go to
  report a problem with your experiment.

#### Code Version Options (`.env.github.local`)

The `.env.github.local` file contains information about the latest git commit for this project. The purpose of this file
is so that your Javascript application can keep track of which version of the code it is running.
One key principle of <SmileText/> is that [data must always be linked to the code that created it](principles.html#data-must-always-be-linked-to-the-code-that-created-it).

This file is generated automatically using a [post commit hook](https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/git-hooks) which finds the current information and regenerates the file. For this reason you should **never edit this file**. A helpful message at the top of the file will always remind you this. The post-commit hook logic which generates the file is stored in `scripts/post-commit`.

```
# DO NOT EDIT THIS FILE IT IS AUTOMATICALLY GENERATED
# this file is automatically generated by
# the post-commit hook (see scripts/post-commit).

VITE_PROJECT_NAME      = my_cool_project
VITE_GIT_HASH          = de318d8
VITE_GIT_REPO_NAME     = ${VITE_PROJECT_NAME}
VITE_GIT_OWNER         = gureckis
VITE_GIT_BRANCH_NAME   = main
VITE_GIT_LAST_MSG      = trigger a deployment!!
VITE_DEPLOY_BASE_PATH  =  "/${VITE_GIT_OWNER}/${VITE_GIT_REPO_NAME}/${VITE_GIT_BRANCH_NAME}/"
VITE_CODE_NAME         = something-something-something

# this port might not be correct, but it doesn't really matter
VITE_DEV_PORT_NUM      =  3000
VITE_DEPLOY_URL        =  "http://localhost:${VITE_PORT_NUM}${VITE_DEPLOY_BASE_PATH}"
VITE_CODE_NAME_DEPLOY_URL         =  "http://localhost:${VITE_DEV_PORT_NUM}/e/${VITE_CODE_NAME}"
```

Options include

- `VITE_PROJECT_NAME` is the name of your project (obtained from your the name of your git repository)
- `VITE_GIT_HASH` is a [SHA hash](https://www.designveloper.com/blog/hash-values-sha-1-in-git/) that indexes the current commit. This can be used on GitHub to look up any version of the code as you develop.
- `VITE_REPO_NAME` has the same value as `VITE_PROJECT_NAME`.
- `VITE_GIT_OWNER` is the username of the owner of the repository
- `VITE_BRANCH_NAME` is the name of the branch the most recent commit was made on
- `VITE_GIT_LAST_MSG` is the last commit message
- `VITE_DEPLOY_BASE_PATH` is the most important variable in the file because it configures your [deployment path](/deploying.html#using-github-as-a-project-organizing-tool) or where you code will appear on the server. It is built up out of the configuration options above.
- `VITE_CODE_NAME` is a unique hash of `VITE_DEPLOY_BASE_PATH`` using human readable words (via [codenamize](https://github.com/stemail23/codenamize-js))
- `VITE_DEV_PORT_NUM ` is what port Vite will try to use during development and local integration testing (i.e., when you run `npm run dev`). Defaults to `3010`.
- `VITE_DEPLOY_URL` is the expected URL for your application. When you run the deployment this is set to the final URL of your hosted server. When debugging locally (`npm run dev`) this is set to the URL you open in your browser to develop/debug.
- `VITE_CODE_NAME_DEPLOY_URL` is the version of the deploy URL masked by the `VITE_CODE_NAME`

##### Docs Deployment Config (`.env.docs.local`)

This file configures where the <SmileText/> documentation will be deployed to. These options should generally be shielded from public repositories. Note that these variable names do not begin with `VITE_` meaning they are not accessible to your Javascript experiment.

```
# this file is not tracked by github and contains
# sensitive information inluding write access to our documentation
# web server!

# enter docs web server information here
DOCS_DEPLOY_HOST        = "docs.mydomain.org"
DOCS_DEPLOY_PATH        = "/home/user/domain.org"
DOCS_DEPLOY_PORT        = 22
DOCS_DEPLOY_USER        = user
DOCS_DEPLOY_KEY         = "-----BEGIN RSA PRIVATE KEY-----\nYOURKEY\n-----END RSA PRIVATE KEY-----"
```

- `DOCS_DEPLOY_HOST` is the hostname of where you upload your files
- `DOCS_DEPLOY_PATH` is the directory you upload your docs to
- `DOCS_DEPLOY_PORT` is the ssh port for your server (usually 22)
- `DOCS_DEPLOY_USER` is the username for your server
- `DOCS_DEPLOY_KEY` is the RSA private key used to access your server via passwordless ssh[^rsakey]

##### Deployment Config (`.env.deploy.local`)

The final file configures similar (secret) deployment options for your actual experiment.

```
# this file is not tracked by github and contains
# sensitive information inluding write access to our experiment
# hosting web server!

# enter experiment hosting web server information here
EXP_DEPLOY_HOST        = "exps.mydomain.org"
EXP_DEPLOY_PATH        = "/home/user/exps.mydomain.org"
EXP_DEPLOY_PORT        = 22
EXP_DEPLOY_USER        = user
SLACK_WEBHOOK_URL      = https://hooks.slack.com/workflows/something
SLACK_WEBHOOK_ERROR_URL= https://hooks.slack.com/workflows/somethingelse
EXP_DEPLOY_KEY         = "-----BEGIN RSA PRIVATE KEY-----\n-----END RSA PRIVATE KEY-----"

```

- `EXP_DEPLOY_HOST` is the hostname of where you upload your files
- `EXP_DEPLOY_PATH` is the directory you upload your experiment to
- `EXP_DEPLOY_PORT` is the ssh port for your server (usually 22)
- `EXP_DEPLOY_USER` is the username for your server
- `SLACK_WEBHOOK_URL` is the url for the Slack Webhook for posting deployment messages
- `SLACK_WEBHOOK_ERROR_URL` is the url for the Slack Webhook for posting error messages
- `EXP_DEPLOY_KEY` is the RSA private key used to access your server via passwordless ssh[^rsakey]

[^rsakey]: The key needs to be all on one line with `\n` character coding new lines.

## Configuring your deployment settings on GitHub

Several of the configuration options are designed to configure ["secrets"](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/security-guides/encrypted-secrets) on your GitHub repo. These are variables that you define in the settings section of the repository which can then be accessed by a script at run time using Github Actions. They are omitted from version control and from logs making it a good way to share sensitive information without exposing them in a public repo. When you run `npm run upload_config` you should see output like this (with NYUCCL/smile replaced with your username and repo):

```
> smile@0.0.0 upload_config
> sh scripts/update_config.sh

✓ Set Actions secret SECRET_APP_CONFIG for NYUCCL/smile
✓ Set Actions secret DOCS_DEPLOY_PORT for NYUCCL/smile
✓ Set Actions secret DOCS_DEPLOY_PATH for NYUCCL/smile
✓ Set Actions secret DOCS_DEPLOY_USER for NYUCCL/smile
✓ Set Actions secret DOCS_DEPLOY_HOST for NYUCCL/smile
✓ Set Actions secret DOCS_DEPLOY_KEY for NYUCCL/smile
✓ Set Actions secret EXP_DEPLOY_HOST for NYUCCL/smile
✓ Set Actions secret SLACK_WEBHOOK_ERROR_URL for NYUCCL/smile
✓ Set Actions secret EXP_DEPLOY_KEY for NYUCCL/smile
✓ Set Actions secret EXP_DEPLOY_USER for NYUCCL/smile
✓ Set Actions secret EXP_DEPLOY_PATH for NYUCCL/smile
✓ Set Actions secret EXP_DEPLOY_PORT for NYUCCL/smile
✓ Set Actions secret SLACK_WEBHOOK_URL for NYUCCL/smile
```

These secrets are used by the GitHub actions to properly build and deploy your website and docs without causing problems. See the discussion [here](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/60176044/how-do-i-use-an-env-file-with-github-actions) for some helpful tips.

## Importing configuration settings into your experiment

Variables with the name `VITE_` are made available to your web application/experiment. [Vite](https://vitejs.dev) uses the [dotenv Node.js package](https://vitejs.dev/guide/env-and-mode.html) to read in `.env` files and make them accessible in your javascript. This is done by doing a static string replacement operation on all the files before building them (and is also done as a step in the development server). The variables become available in your code as `import.meta.env.VITE_XXXX` where `XXX` is the name of the environment variable.

If you look at the content of `src/config.js` you can see how these items are pulled into a global configuration object.

```
// config.js

// global configuration options for the smile app

export default {
    project_name: import.meta.env.VITE_PROJECT_NAME, // autocompute this on intitialization
    code_name: import.meta.env.VITE_CODE_NAME,
    code_name_url: import.meta.env.VITE_CODE_NAME_DEPLOY_URL,
    github: {
        repo_name: import.meta.env.VITE_GIT_REPO_NAME,
        owner: import.meta.env.VITE_GIT_OWNER,
        branch: import.meta.env.VITE_GIT_BRANCH_NAME,
        last_commit_msg: import.meta.env.VITE_GIT_LAST_MSG,
        last_commit_hash: import.meta.env.VITE_GIT_HASH, // autocompute this all the time
        commit_url: 'https://github.com/' + import.meta.env.VITE_GIT_OWNER + '/' + import.meta.env.VITE_GIT_REPO_NAME + '/commit/' + import.meta.env.VITE_GIT_HASH
    },
    browser_exclude: import.meta.env.VITE_BROWSER_EXCLUDE,
    allow_repeats: import.meta.env.VITE_ALLOW_REPEATS,
    bug_reports: import.meta.env.VITE_BUG_REPORTS,
    deploy_url: import.meta.env.VITE_DEPLOY_URL, // auto compute this
    firebaseConfig : {
        apiKey: import.meta.env.VITE_FIREBASE_APIKEY,
        authDomain: import.meta.env.VITE_FIREBASE_AUTHDOMAIN,
        projectId: import.meta.env.VITE_FIREBASE_PROJECTID,
        storageBucket: import.meta.env.VITE_FIREBASE_STORAGEBUCKET,
        messagingSenderId: import.meta.env.VITE_FIREBASE_MESSAGINGSENDERID,
        appId: import.meta.env.VITE_FIREBASE_APPID
    }
}
```

It is important to keep in mind that variables passed to `src/core/config.js` will not necessarily appear in GitHub but **will** be visible to people performing your experiment via the source code. So it is useful to keep in mind if a configuration option should or shouldn't be shared with your Javascript experiment.

## Adding New Configuration Options

Adding new configuration options should mostly happen in `.env.local`. You simply make up a new `VITE_SOMETHING` variable. Then add it to the object in `src/core/config.js` to expose it to your web application! The configuration is available as `smileconfig` anywhere in your Vue app. It's pretty easy.

Note: if you add new configuration options, you need to also update them on GitHub for those to sync to deployments. Run `npm run upload_config` as explained above under [Configuring your deployment settings on GitHub](#configuring-your-deployment-settings-on-github).
