docs/requirements.md, before:

# :space_invader: Required software you will need to install

Before getting started working on a <SmileText/> project you will need to install a few items on your local computer.  

:::info Zero-install option
This guide is the recommended strategy for most people (particularly core lab members like postdocs and phd students).  However, there is also the option of working on the project using a pre-configured cloud-based environment hosted by [Gitpod](https://gitpod.io). Click [here](/gitpod) for more info.
:::

## 1. Install the latest Node.js

You will need to install Node.js on your computer if you haven't already.  You can download the latest version [here](https://nodejs.org/en/download/).  After the install completes, verify that you have the `npm` command in your terminal program of choice.  If you already have Node installed verify that the version of npm is greater than or equal to 8.1.2.  You can check your installed version by typing `npm -v`.


## 2. Create a GitHub account if you haven't and install the command-line tool

You will also need a [GitHub account](https://github.com/join) (a free account is fine).  Tell Todd your username so he can add
you as a member of the [NYUCCL organization](https://github.com/nyuccl).  

Next make sure you have the GitHub Command Line Interface (cli) tool installed:
[download it here](https://cli.github.com) using the installer or homebrew.  

Next, allow the CLI access to your GitHub account by typing:

```
gh auth login --web
```

into your terminal program.  This will open your default browser and ask you to log in to GitHub.


## 3. Request access to the shared database resources

Later you will want to customize the configuration of your application, but if you are in the <GureckisLabText/> you will want to simply decrypt the pre-configured files provided in the repository.

::: info Great news!
You only need to do this the first time you try out <SmileText/>!  Then you will forever be part of the family.
:::


To do this first install the git secret package which includes the relevant dependencies using homebrew: 

```
brew install git-secret
```

Next create a RSA key-pair for your email address:

```
gpg --gen-key
```

There will be a sequence of questions you answer.  Use your preferred email address e.g., the one linked to GitHub.  Send Todd your public key by sending the output of this command to him on slack or via email (replace example@gmail.com with the address you provided to `gpg`):

<div class="language-"><pre><code><span class="line"><span style="color:#A6ACCD">gpg --armor --export example@gmail.com</span></span></code></pre></div>

Wait for him to reply and to make a push to the main <SmileText/> repo giving access to the encrypted files to your email address.

## 4. Install a web browser (or two or three)

Install Safari, Chrome and/or Firefox.  It can make sense to install multiple browsers and test your code against each of them. However, for developing/testing your code Chrome is particularly recommended because of the wide range of available extensions.

## 5. Install Vue Devtools (optional)

Optionally install the [Vue Devtools](https://devtools.vuejs.org) in your browser (e.g., Chrome).  This can help in debugging your experiment.

## 6. Install VSCode and Volar (optional)

It is highly recommended that you use [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) and the [Volar](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=Vue.volar) extension as your text editor/development environment.

## 7. Install the Google Cloud Command Line Tool (optional)

If you need to write custom software that runs on the server-side (e.g., to [compute bonuses](/bonuses) for your experiment securely), then install the Google Command Line tools:

```
brew install --cask google-cloud-sdk
```

Commit message:

generalizing docs for use outside gureckislab

docs/requirements.md, after:

# :space_invader: Required software you will need to install

Before getting started working on a <SmileText/> project you will need to install a few items on your local computer.  

:::info Zero-install option
This guide is the recommended strategy for most people (particularly core lab members like postdocs and phd students).  However, there is also the option of working on the project using a pre-configured cloud-based environment hosted by [Gitpod](https://gitpod.io) which might be nice for undergrads with less experience installing software using the command line. Click [here](/gitpod) for more info.
:::

:::warning First time setting Smile up for a new lab?
This guide (and most of the docs) assumes you have set up Smile for your lab.  If you need to set up Smile for your lab please read [this guide](/labconfig) first.  From here on out you will be called your lab's <SmileText/> coordinator.

:::

## 1. Install the latest Node.js

You will need to install Node.js on your computer if you haven't already.  You can download the latest version [here](https://nodejs.org/en/download/).  After the install completes, verify that you have the `npm` command in your terminal program of choice.  If you already have Node installed verify that the version of npm is greater than or equal to 8.1.2.  You can check your installed version by typing `npm -v`.


## 2. Create a GitHub account if you haven't and install the command-line tool

You will also need a [GitHub account](https://github.com/join) (a free account is fine).  Tell the main <SmileText/> coordinator for your lab your username so they can add you as a member of the lab's Github organization.

Next make sure you have the GitHub Command Line Interface (cli) tool installed:
[download it here](https://cli.github.com) using the installer or homebrew.  

Next, allow the CLI access to your GitHub account by typing:

```
gh auth login --web
```

into your terminal program.  This will open your default browser and ask you to log in to GitHub.


## 3. Request access to the shared database resources

Later you will want to customize the configuration of your application, but to begin with you you will want to simply decrypt the pre-configured files provided in the repository.

::: info Great news!
You only need to do this the first time you try out <SmileText/>!  Then you will forever be part of the family.
:::


To do this first install the git secret package which includes the relevant dependencies using homebrew: 

```
brew install git-secret
```

Next create a RSA key-pair for your email address:

```
gpg --gen-key
```

There will be a sequence of questions you answer.  Use your preferred email address e.g., the one linked to GitHub.  Send the main <SmileText/> coordinator for your lab your public key by sending the output of this command to them on slack or via email (replace example@gmail.com with the address you provided to `gpg`):

<div class="language-"><pre><code><span class="line"><span style="color:#A6ACCD">gpg --armor --export example@gmail.com</span></span></code></pre></div>

Wait for the coordinator to reply and to make a push to the main <SmileText/> repo giving access to the encrypted files to your email address.

## 4. Install a web browser (or two or three)

Install Safari, Chrome and/or Firefox.  It can make sense to install multiple browsers and test your code against each of them. However, for developing/testing your code Chrome is particularly recommended because of the wide range of available extensions.

## 5. Install Vue Devtools (optional)

Optionally install the [Vue Devtools](https://devtools.vuejs.org) in your browser (e.g., Chrome).  This can help in debugging your experiment.

## 6. Install VSCode and Volar (optional)

It is highly recommended that you use [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) and the [Volar](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=Vue.volar) extension as your text editor/development environment.

## 7. Install the Google Cloud Command Line Tool (optional)

If you need to write custom software that runs on the server-side (e.g., to [compute bonuses](/bonuses) for your experiment securely), then install the Google Command Line tools:

```
brew install --cask google-cloud-sdk
```
